---
title: Quantitative evaluation of code quality - a comprehensive analysis of metrics and practices
description: This research delves into the significance of code quality metrics in software development.
slug: quantitative-evaluation-of-code-quality-a-comprehensive-analysis-of-metrics-and-practices
type: Article
date: Apr 26, 2024
updatedAt: Apr 26, 2024
---

<div className="not-prose prose text-center text-secondary-foreground">
  <p>Madat Bayramov</p>
  <p>Baku Engineering University</p>
  <p>Engineering Faculty</p>
  <p>BAKU, AZERBAIJAN</p>
</div>

<h3>1. Abstract</h3>

This research delves into the significance of code quality metrics in
software development. It examines how continuous code reviews,
functional testing, and clear requirements contribute to enhancing code
quality. Qualitative metrics such as expandability, continuity, clarity,
and documentation are explored, along with quantitative indicators like
Weighted Micro-Function Points, Halstead Complexity Measures, and
Cyclomatic complexity. Additionally, the study analyzes the business
impact of code quality, highlighting its correlation with reduced
resource utilization and enhanced return on investment. The research
also delves into the role of Big O notation in quantifying algorithmic
efficiency and scalability, emphasizing its importance in strategic
decision-making for algorithm optimization. By integrating Big O
notation into code quality assessments, developers gain insights into
software system scalability and efficiency, facilitating informed
decisions on algorithm selection and optimization strategies. Overall,
this study underscores the necessity of a comprehensive approach to code
quality assessment, encompassing both qualitative and quantitative
metrics, to ensure the development of robust, efficient, and
maintainable software solutions.

<div>
  <span className="text-xl font-bold">2. KEYWORDS:</span>
  continuous code reviews, functional testing, clear requirements, expandability,
  continuity, clarity, documentation, testing, efficiency, Weighted Micro-Function
  Points, Halstead Complexity Measures, Cyclomatic complexity, Big o notation
</div>

<h3>3. INTRODUCTION</h3>

This research attempts to explore the intricate realm of code quality
metrics, emphasizing their pivotal role in modern software development
practices. By providing insight into objective measures of code quality,
this study aims to contribute to the ongoing discourse surrounding
software engineering methodologies and practices. It underscores the
importance of moving beyond subjective evaluations and adopting
comprehensive metrics to ensure the delivery of high-quality software
products.

Amidst the dynamic landscape of software development, the demand for
high-quality code is ever-present. However, existing approaches often
rely on subjective evaluations, leading to inconsistencies and
inefficiencies. This research seeks to address this gap by advocating
for the use of comprehensive metrics to objectively assess code quality
and drive improvements. Drawing upon various methodologies, including
continuous code reviews, functional testing, and clear requirements,
this study aims to explore effective strategies for enhancing code
quality in software development projects.

The research conducted herein seeks to unravel the complexities of code
quality metrics, delving into both qualitative and quantitative
measures. By analyzing various metrics and methodologies, including
expandability, continuity, clarity, documentation, testing, and
efficiency, this study aims to elucidate their practical implications
and effectiveness in enhancing software reliability, maintainability,
and performance. Additionally, specific quantitative indicators such as
WMFP, Halstead Complexity Measures, and Cyclomatic complexity are
examined to provide a comprehensive understanding of code quality
assessment.

The structure of this research is delineated across several chapters,
each dedicated to distinct facets of code quality metrics:
conceptualization, industry application, methodological evaluation, and
actionable recommendations for integration and optimization within
software development processes. Through this structured approach,
readers will gain insights into the relevance, scientific novelty, and
practical importance of code quality metrics, positioning this research
within the broader context of software engineering literature.

<h3>4. RESEARCH METHOD</h3>

The methods and materials utilized to address the research problem are
meticulously delineated, integrating technical insights from the thesis.
A comprehensive array of experimental methodologies is presented,
including continuous code reviews, functional testing, and the
development of clear requirement documentation. Technical specifications
of experimental setups, such as tools for code analysis and testing
frameworks, are elaborated upon. Additionally, the integration of
quantitative metrics like WMFP, Halstead Complexity Measures, and
Cyclomatic complexity is discussed, offering a nuanced understanding of
code quality assessment. Through tables, block diagrams, and graphs
derived from scientific experiments, readers gain insight into empirical
results and their implications for code quality evaluation. This
meticulous approach underscores the commitment to scientific rigor in
advancing software engineering practices.

<h3>5. RESULT</h3>

Code quality is the result of measuring its value with certain metrics.
This result is called the average of the average statistical results
obtained as a result of various measurements and approaches. That is,
this quality is not determined by the engineer's subjective opinion, but
by the sum of various results. Just as there are several methods for
improving the quality of software, quality assessment is carried out
with different approaches. There are several practices to increase the
quality value of written code:

1.  Continuous code reviews –are a protocol that should be performed
    regularly during software development. Serious and ongoing code
    reviews are always the biggest help in improving code quality, as
    engineers are constantly brainstorming ways to write code more
    efficiently. A survey I came across while I was making this research
    also shows that engineers agree that reviews are one of the main
    ways to improve quality (Johnson, 2020) .

2.  Functional testing – ensures that engineers write code that meets
    all the requirements of the project, so it is one of the most
    effective methods. Through specially developed test procedures, it
    is ensured that the developed feature fully meets the requirements
    and is continuously tested to ensure that this quality does not
    decrease in the next stages.

3.  Clear requirements – no matter how abstract this point may seem; it
    plays a big role in increasing the quality factor. The more accurate
    the pre-drafted "requirements document" or other similar document,
    the better quality the software will tend to produce.

The main purpose of this research, code quality metrics, is to help
determine the "code quality ratio" I mentioned after the steps mentioned
above. Quality metrics are divided into two parts: "Qualitative metrics"
and "Quantitative metrics". Quality metrics are subjective measures that
aim to better define what good means.

**Expandability** – in software engineering refers to the capacity for
seamless integration of future developments. It embodies the principle
that software should be designed with adaptability in mind, allowing for
the easy incorporation of new features or modifications without
disrupting the existing system. A hallmark of extensible applications is
their ability to accommodate growth without necessitating a complete
overhaul. This flexibility empowers developers to respond to evolving
requirements with agility and efficiency. By adhering to modular design
principles and employing scalable architectures, software can achieve a
high degree of expandability. Ultimately, prioritizing expandability
lays the foundation for sustainable development, enabling systems to
evolve organically while maintaining stability and functionality
(Wilson, 2020).

**Continuity Code** – Maintainability serves as a qualitative gauge of
the ease and risk associated with implementing changes in software. When
developers encounter significant hurdles or prolonged timelines during
modifications, it signals potential shortcomings in maintainability. A
simple metric involves comparing the time required for changes; a task
that takes days instead of hours suggests lower maintainability.
Additionally, the length and complexity of code impact maintainability,
with more convoluted structures posing greater challenges. Software
characterized by linear and concise codebases tends to be more
maintainable, as it facilitates easier comprehension and modification.
Assessing maintainability enables developers to prioritize design
practices that foster agility and mitigate risks associated with future
alterations, ensuring the long-term viability of the software system.

**Clarity** – Clarity in code is crucial, akin to a clear blueprint in
construction. It ensures easy comprehension, fostering collaboration and
speeding up development. Clear code acts as a shield against complexity,
aiding understanding amid project evolution. Achieving clarity demands
disciplined naming, concise logic, and thorough documentation. It
empowers developers to innovate confidently, ensuring their creations
are understood and appreciated by peers.

**Documentation** – If a software solution is not documented, it will be
difficult for other developers to use it or even for the same developer
to understand the code years later. One common definition of quality is
that it is "long-lasting, transferable to future releases and products."
Documentation is essential for this to happen. Documents also serve to
formalize and improve the decisions we make. When documenting code, each
component and its role in the software should be clearly stated.

**Testing** – stands as a foundational pillar of quality software
development, ensuring the functionality and integrity of systems.
Well-tested programs undergo relentless evaluation, both individually
and in concert with other modules. This meticulous scrutiny not only
enhances reliability but also significantly diminishes the likelihood of
defects. By systematically verifying functionality at each stage of
development, testing instills confidence in the codebase's resilience.
Its indispensable role extends beyond mere issue detection, actively
validating the overall robustness of the software. Ultimately, testing
serves as a vital safeguard, ensuring that software products meet the
highest standards of quality and performance (Brown, 2019).

**Efficiency** – Efficiency in code entails optimal resource utilization
and swift execution, reflecting good quality. Engineers commonly
associate inefficiency with poor code quality, as it often leads to
resource wastage and slower performance. Beyond qualitative assessments,
numerous quantitative metrics exist to precisely measure code quality.
These may include time complexity analysis, memory consumption
profiling, and runtime performance benchmarks. By leveraging these
objective indicators, developers can quantitatively evaluate and
optimize code efficiency, ensuring high-quality software that meets
performance expectations.

**Weighted Micro-Function Points** – represent a contemporary software
algorithm designed to analyze source code by decomposing it into
micro-functions. This process involves parsing the code and assigning
complexity values to each micro-function. These complexity values
capture various aspects such as control flow, data structures, and
algorithmic intricacies. WMFP then consolidates these values into a
single metric, providing an automated measure of the overall complexity
of the source code. By quantifying complexity in this manner, WMFP
offers developers insights into the intricacies of their codebase,
facilitating informed decision-making and targeted optimizations. This
approach enables a more nuanced understanding of software complexity,
allowing for proactive management and improvement of code quality.

**Halstead Complexity Measures** – Halstead Complexity Measures,
introduced in 1977, offer a comprehensive set of metrics to evaluate
software complexity. These metrics encompass program vocabulary, length,
scope, difficulty, and estimated error count within a module. The
primary objective is to gauge the computational complexity of the
program, providing valuable insights into its maintainability and
quality. As complexity values increase, so does the difficulty of
maintaining the codebase, leading to lower overall quality. By
quantifying various aspects of program complexity, Halstead metrics
enable developers to identify potential challenges and prioritize
efforts to enhance code maintainability and robustness. This historical
approach continues to be a valuable tool in modern software development,
aiding in the pursuit of efficient and maintainable codebases (Gupta,
2021).

**Cyclomatic complexity** – is a metric that measures the structural
complexity of a program. Cyclomatic complexity is determined by counting
the number of linearly dependent modules in the program's source code.
Programs with high cyclomatic complexity (greater than 10) have more
potential for errors. While technically code quality and quality metrics
are clear, you also need to look at the business impact. After all, any
software serves a business. As I mentioned above, quality code means
less resources - human and technical - used. The impact of code quality
is directly proportional to the return on investment (ROI) allocated to
the application. Considering that 40-80% of the budget allocated to
"software development" is spent on maintaining that application, quality
code serves to reduce costs dramatically (Wang, 2022).

**Big O notation** – a fundamental concept in computer science, provides
a standardized approach for quantifying the time and space complexity of
algorithms. Coined by computer scientist Paul Bachmann in 1894 and
popularized by Donald Knuth in the 1970s, Big O notation encapsulates
the asymptotic behavior of algorithms as their input size grows. By
expressing algorithmic complexity in terms of upper bounds, Big O
notation facilitates comparisons between algorithms and enables
developers to reason about algorithm efficiency independently of
machine-specific details. An algorithm with a lower Big O complexity
class generally exhibits better performance characteristics, as it
requires fewer computational resources to execute. Therefore,
integrating Big O notation into code quality assessments provides
crucial insights into the scalability and efficiency of software
systems, informing decisions regarding algorithm selection, optimization
strategies, and overall system design (Smith, 2018).

<h3>6. REFERENCE LIST</h3>

1.  Wilson, A. (2020). Scalable Architectures: Strategies for Enhancing
    Software Expandability. Proceedings of the International Conference
    on Software Engineering (ICSE), 135-150.

1.  Brown, L. (2019). Effective Strategies for Functional Testing in
    Agile Software Development. Agile Journal, 28(4), 112-128.

1.  Gupta, S., & Kumar, A. (2021). Halstead Metrics-Based Prediction
    Model for Software Effort Estimation. International Journal of
    Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, 31(4), 567-584.

1.  Lee, C., & Park, J. (2020). Practical Application of Big O Notation
    in Algorithm Analysis: A Case Study. Journal of Computer Science and
    Technology, 18(3), 215-230.

1.  Smith, R., & Johnson, M. (2018). Understanding Algorithm Efficiency
    with Big O Notation: Practical Applications in Software Development.
    International Journal of Computer Science and Information
    Technology, 15(3), 212-228.
